# Idiosyncrasies of acquiring data from small animals

## Rationale
Many parts of the acquisition procedure differ between human and small animal
scanning.
Moreover, while human scans are almost always driven by a specialist radiographer,
small animal scans are often controlled by researchers themselves.
The "Do-It-Yourself" experience provides preclinical researchers a grassroots
understanding of data quality that researchers working with humans may find
difficult to obtain.

## Hardware
### Magnet field strength
The scanner's field strength, which range from 4.7 to 16.4 Tesla, can itself
have many impacts on the data quality: higher field strength
provides higher signal-to-noise ratios in shorter acquisition times, but it also
exacerbates many types of artifacts.
### Scanner manufacture
Bruker currently has a monopoly in preclinical imaging, but many sites have older scanners from other manufacturers.
Those with Bruker scanners may also have a maintenance package which includes tests
for quality assurance.
### Coils
Volume coils require manual tuning (at least) daily.
For scanners from out-of-business manufacturers, "homemade" coils are more common
and less standardised.
Cryocoils are increasingly available but not yet ubiquitous.
### Physiological monitoring
While the requirements for accurate physiological monitoring is explained in more
detail below, there are many pieces of hardware that can be discussed.
This minimally includes rectal thermometers and respiration balloons, but can also
include pulse oximeters and/or invasive blood pressure monitoring. 
### Other hardware_
Cradles, bite bars, ear bars, pillows can be provided by the scanner manufacturer or
"homemade".
These facilitate support of the animal in the scanner and reduce movement.

## Software
### Scanner software
Related to scanner manufacture, is the software used to acquire and reconstruct
the images.
Bruker's software, Paravision, has several versions available.
Paravision generates `2dseq` files rather than the `DICOM` images commonly
generated by human scanners.
Consequently, conversion to standardised naming formats requires specialised
software that can work with these proprietary files.
### Other software
Similarly, various software is available for monitoring physiology which is
discussed at length [below](#physiology).
As the animals are often anaesthetised task-based fMRI is less common.
Instead, experiments may generate evoked-responses to some stimulus (e.g.
stimulating a paw with electricity) in the scanner.
Thus, software is also required to synchronise the stimulus onset to the scanning
acquisition.
Such software can also be used for the inverse task: by _gating acquisitions_ the
scanner will only acquire data at certain times (e.g., during a certain section of
the respiratory cycle).

## Anatomy
### Scale
An obvious difference between small animals and humans is the scale of their brains.
Adult human brain volumes are approximately 1200 cm<sup>3</sup>, while adult rat
brains are approximately 2.5 cm<sup>3</sup> and mice brain volumes are smaller
still.
This difference in scale necessitates the increased magnet field strength but the change in field strength is not proportional to the change in size.
### Tissue differences
The proportion of white matter in rodents is smaller than that in humans.
Since white matter bundles are much less distinct in rats and mice, the MR 
signal contrast between the two tissue types is often less well-defined.

Additionally, the olfactory bulb is much larger in rodents than in humans and there
is no cortical folding.
### Orientation
As bipeds, the human brain sits on top of the spinal cord and consequently the
rostrocaudal plane is curved along the anterioposterior and superoinferior planes.
In quadripeds, like rodents, the anterioposterior and rostrocaudal planes are
equivalent.

Additionally, I have noticed confusion in the convention for naming the scanner
orientations.
Humans most often enter the scanner supine along the axis that aligns
with that of B0 so the B1 field aligns with the anterior-posterior plane, and the
B0 field axis aligns with the superior-inferior axis.
Rodents are likely to be prone (although not always) and because of the difference
in anatomical orientation described above, the posterior-anterior plane in
quadripeds aligns with the B0 field axis.

Thus orientation may be "scanner-oriented" (where the axes aligns with the magnetic
field directions) or "subject-oriented" (where the axes align with the anatomy of
the subject).
### Strain
There may be differences in anatomy or physiology that come from differences in 
species strain.
In particular, genetically modified animals may be more susceptible to larger
ventricular compartments.
Another example may be an increase in bodyweight which can have downstream effects
on anaesthesia.

## Physiology
### Anaesthesia and sedation
It is common for animals to be anaesthetised or sedated for MRI to reduce motion.
Different anaesthetics and sedatives act through different pathways, and each come
with benefits and costs.

Compound | Administration | Benefits | Costs
--- | --- | --- | ---
Isoflurane | inhalation | <li> non-invasive administration</li><li>Short recovery</li>|<li>Uncouples BOLD response</li><li>Dangerous cumulative effects</li>
(Dex)meditomidine | infusion | <li> preserves BOLD response </li> | <li> requires cannulation</li><li>requires Atipamezole for speedy recovery</li>
Alpha-Chloralose | infusion |<li> preserves BOLD response </li> | <li>Difficult recovery</li>
Ketamine | infusion | |

### Respiration
Respiration rate and the pattern of inhalation is impacted by the choice of
anaesthesia or sedative.
Often anaesthetic procedures prescribe a respiration rate to standardise across
animals, rather than a rate of anaesthetic delivery.

### Thermal homeostasis
Small animals, particularly mice, find it difficult to regulate their body
temperature in the scanner, especially when unconscious.
Consequently, internal body temperature is recorded with a thermometer.
It is possible to use the thermometer reading as part of a feedback loop
controlling either a water heating system (built in to the bed or applied as a
heated blanket) or an air heating system (which is blown through the scanner bore
with a fan).

Since temperature is critical for the rate of oxygen consumption, temperature should be maintained within a small normative range.
### Movement
Movement is often reduced in scanning animal imaging due to the use of bite bars,
ear bars, and anaesthesitics and sedatives.
However, movement should still be carefully scrutinized as it may point to:
- less anaesthetised/sedated state
- movement associated with the onset of a task (e.g. jumping at stimulus)
- scanner drift 

## Hands-on
Let's see some of these factors in action.
The acquisition notebook has examples of data that have poor acquisition.
Can you guess where they have deviated from the standard operating procedure?
